about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: About me
permalink: /about/
---

Hi, my name is Laszlo Treszkai. Here's [my CV](/files/CV.pdf). I love mathematics, engineering, and science.

I graduated with honours at the MSc in Artificial Intelligence at the University of Edinburgh, where I learned a ton about machine learning, NLP, and Bayesian analysis. Previously I received an [MSc in Electrical Engineering](https://www.mit.bme.hu/eng/) at the Budapest University of Technology and Economics, with a focus on embedded systems. During that program, most of my time went into building a race car in the [BME Formula Racing Team](frt.bme.hu) for the [Formula Student](https://www.formulastudent.de) competition. After university, I worked as an embedded engineer at [TTControl](ttcontrol.com) on the HY-TTC 500 ECU, which is used for safety critical applications in big industrial vehicles like tractors, snow groomers and bridge building machines.

You can reach me at <laszlo.treszkai@gmail.com>, or by commenting at a post.

Commit message:

More info in About me

about.md, after:

---
layout: page
title: About me
permalink: /about/
---

Hi, my name is Laszlo Treszkai (anglicized pronunciation: laslo treskai, ends like “sky”). I love mathematics, engineering, and science. Here's [my CV](/files/CV.pdf).

I graduated with honours at the MSc in Artificial Intelligence at the University of Edinburgh, where I learned a ton about machine learning, NLP, and Bayesian analysis. Previously I received an [MSc in Electrical Engineering](https://www.mit.bme.hu/eng/) at the Budapest University of Technology and Economics, with a focus on embedded systems. During that program, most of my time went into building a race car in the [BME Formula Racing Team](frt.bme.hu) for the [Formula Student](https://www.formulastudent.de) competition.

Some of the things I did:
 - as an **embedded engineer** at [TTControl](ttcontrol.com) I wrote software for the [HY-TTC 500 ECU](https://www.ttcontrol.com/products/electronic-control-units/safety-certified-controllers/hy-ttc-500-family/), which is used for safety critical applications in big industrial vehicles like tractors, snow groomers and bridge building machines;
 - as an **AI engineer** at [Sclable Business Solutions](https://sclable.com/en/) I designed and implemented a recommendation engine using Bayesian inference;
 - I verified the design and implementation of **electric** and **driverless vehicles** at Formula Student events, recently at [FS East](https://fseast.eu/gallery-2019/), which is an engineering competition for students to design and build a race car (over a year);
 - now I'm thinking about ways to improve statistical methods in medicine: embracing uncertainty for less false positives, more accurate inferences, easier meta-analyses.

You can reach me at <laszlo.treszkai@gmail.com>, or by commenting at a post.
