content/pages/about.md, before:

---
layout: page
title: About me
permalink: /about/
---

Hi, my name is Laszlo Treszkai -- the name is Hungarian, but its anglicized pronunciation I prefer as “laslo tresky”, ending like “sky”. I love various branches of mathematics (with a knack for statistics) and engineering (both software and physical).

I graduated with honours at the MSc in Artificial Intelligence at the University of Edinburgh, where I learned a ton about machine learning, NLP, and Bayesian analysis. Previously I received an [MSc in Electrical Engineering](https://www.mit.bme.hu/eng/) at the Budapest University of Technology and Economics, with a focus on embedded systems.

Some projects I worked on:
 - designed and **built a race car** with [BME Formula Racing Team](frt.bme.hu) for the [Formula Student](https://www.formulastudent.de) competition (along with a few dozen fellow students, over the course of two years);
 - as an **embedded software engineer** at [TTControl](ttcontrol.com) I wrote the firmware for the [HY-TTC 500 ECU](https://www.ttcontrol.com/products/electronic-control-units/safety-certified-controllers/hy-ttc-500-family/), which is used for safety critical applications in big industrial vehicles like tractors, snow groomers and bridge building machines (in a team of 5 firmware engineers);
 - as an **AI engineer** at [Sclable Business Solutions](https://sclable.com/en/) I designed and implemented a recommendation engine using Bayesian inference;
 - I verified the design and implementation of **electric** and **driverless vehicles** at Formula Student events, most recently at [FS East](https://fseast.eu/gallery-2019/);
 - currently I work in a full-time position at [Abacus Accounting GmbH ](https://abacus.ac/en/) as a **data scientist in Vienna**.

You can reach me at laszlo.treszkai@protonmail.com, or by commenting at a post.

Commit message:

minor changes in about, README, todo

content/pages/about.md, after:

title: About me
    
Hi, my name is Laszlo Treszkai -- the name is Hungarian, ideally pronounced as [la:sloʊ ˈtreskɒɪ]. I love various branches of mathematics (with a knack for statistics) and engineering (both software and physical).

I graduated with honours at the MSc in Artificial Intelligence at the University of Edinburgh, where I learned a ton about machine learning, NLP, and Bayesian analysis. Previously I received an [MSc in Electrical Engineering](https://www.mit.bme.hu/eng/) at the Budapest University of Technology and Economics, with a focus on embedded systems.

Some projects I worked on:
 - designed and **built a race car** with [BME Formula Racing Team](frt.bme.hu) for the [Formula Student](https://www.formulastudent.de) competition (along with a few dozen fellow students, over the course of two years);
 - as an **embedded software engineer** at [TTControl](ttcontrol.com) I wrote the firmware for the [HY-TTC 500 ECU](https://www.ttcontrol.com/products/electronic-control-units/safety-certified-controllers/hy-ttc-500-family/), which is used for safety critical applications in big industrial vehicles like tractors, snow groomers and bridge building machines (in a team of 5 firmware engineers);
 - as an **AI engineer** at [Sclable Business Solutions](https://sclable.com/en/) I designed and implemented a recommendation engine using Bayesian inference;
 - I verified the design and implementation of **electric** and **driverless vehicles** at Formula Student events, most recently at [FS East](https://fseast.eu/gallery-2019/);
 - currently I work in a full-time position at [Abacus Accounting GmbH ](https://abacus.ac/en/) as a **data scientist in Vienna**.

You can reach me at laszlo.treszkai@protonmail.com, or by commenting at a post.
